Naval, welcome to the show. I am so excited to get to talk to you today and ask
you a whole bunch of questions that I have on my mind.
Thank you for having me. I’m excited to be here. I’ve been a long time fan of
your work.
Thank you. Let’s get started with something simple. Can you tell me a little bit
about what you do?
It’s actually not that simple. I have a hard time saying what I do. My day job
is that I am CEO of AngelList, which is a company that I started almost seven
years ago now. AngelList is sort of this platform for startups in the tech
industry and we help entrepreneurs raise money. We help entrepreneurs
recruit talent into their startups and we also help people find jobs into
startups. Now recently we acquired Product Hunt, so we also help companies
launch to customers.
It’s basically a one-stop shop for the early stage tech ecosystem. Whether
you are raising money or you’re investing money, we’re the largest online
platform for that. Whether you’re recruiting talent or whether you’re being
recruited, we’re the largest online platform for startup recruiting. Whether
you’re looking for a new product to try out or whether you’re looking for
customers for your product, we’re also the largest online product platform
for launching that.
It’s sort of become this bigger thing and that’s my day job. I’m also involved in
a bunch of other things. I’m an investor, personally in about 200 companies.
Advisor to a bunch. I’m on a bunch of boards. I occasionally blog and tweet.
I’m also a small partner in a cryptocurrency fund because I’m really into
these coins, like Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Zcash, and so forth. I’m always
cooking up something new. I always have a bunch of side projects that I bring
in.
How do you keep track of that all? What does your typical day look like?
That’s the good part. I don’t have a typical day, nor do I want a typical day.
If there is a typical day, I’m usually inside my office at AngelList, but I’m
basically just operating mostly on email or phone or meetings or squirreled
up at home. There are days where I just work completely from home. There
are days that I don’t work. I’m actually even trying to get rid of this concept
of having to be in a specific place at a specific time. All I care about is am I
doing what I want to do and am I being productive and am I happy. I really
want to break away from this idea of 40 hour weeks, or 60 hour weeks, or 80
hour weeks, or 9-to-5, or roles, or jobs, or identities. It just all feels like a
straitjacket.
You’re one of the most voracious readers I know. You’ve called yourself a
conscious bookworm, and you’ve read a ton. How did you first get interested in
reading?
Reading was my first love. I know that in my childhood, when I was around
nine, ten, eleven years old, I was a latchkey kid. My mom was working
multiple jobs and then she was going to school at night. We were raised by a
single mother, my brother and I were, in New York City. We were in a part of
New York City that isn’t very safe.
Basically the library was my after school center. After I’d come back from
school, I’d just go straight to the library and I’d hang out there until they
closed. Then I’d come home. That was my daily routine. I think even by that
point in time I’d already loved books. I was reading books as a child.
I remember my grandparent’s house in India, I’d be a little kid on the floor
going through all of my grandfather’s Reader’s Digests, which is all he had to
read there. I mean, now, of course, there’s a smorgasbord of information out
there. Anybody could read anything all the time, but back then it was much
more limited so I would read comic books, I would read Reader’s Digest, I
would read story books, whatever I could my hands on. Mysteries. I was big
into mysteries. I think I just always loved to read because I’m actually an
antisocial introvert. I was just lost in the world of words and ideas from an
early age. I think some of it comes from the happy circumstance that when I
was young nobody forced me on what to read.
I think there’s a tendency among parents and teachers to say, “Oh, you should
read this, but don’t read that.” The reality is I just read a lot that, by today’s
standards, would be considered mental junk food.
Eventually you just get to, like reading, you run out of junk food and then
you start eating the healthy food or your tastes graduate. I think to some
extent that’s what happened with me because I started comic books and then
went from that into mysteries and went from that into fantasies and then to
sci-fi. Then from sci-fi went into science and then mathematics and then
philosophy. It just kind of kept climbing up the stack. I was lucky that there
was no one around when I was seven years old or six years old saying, “You
shouldn’t read that. You should read this instead.”
Is most of what you read today physical or on a computer or Kindle?
For convenience, it’s mostly Kindle. It’s not the Kindle device itself. It’s an
iPad. For books that I really, really like, I will also buy a physical copy so I
have both. There’s no excuse not to read it. A really good book costs $10
or $20 and can change your life in a meaningful way. It’s not something I
believe in saving money on. This was even back when I was broke and I had
no money. I always spent money on books. I never viewed that as an expense.
That’s an investment to me. I probably spend 10 times as much money on
books as I actually get through. In other words, for every $200 worth of books
I buy, I actually end up making it through 10%. I’ll read $20 worth of books,
but it’s still absolutely worth it.
You and I have that in common.
Yeah. Anything that’s one of the greats, if I read a book and that I know it’s
amazing, I’ll buy multiple copies, partially to give away, partially because
I have them lying around the house. These days I find myself rereading as
much or more as I do reading. I think this was a tweet from an account on
Twitter that I saw, this guy @illacertus, and he basically said, “I don’t want to
read everything. I just want to read the 100 great books over and over again.”
I think there’s a lot to that. It’s really more about identifying what are the
great books to you, because different books speak to different people, and
then really absorbing those.
I don’t know about you, but I have very poor attention. I skim. I speed read. I
jump around. I could not tell you specific passages or quotes from books. At
some deep level, you do absorb them and they become part of the threads of
the tapestry of your psyche. They do kind of weave in there. There are books
that I’m sure you’ve had this feeling where you pick up a book and you start
reading it, and you’re like, “This is pretty interesting. This is pretty good.”
You’re getting this increasing sense of deja vu, and then about 2/3 or halfway
through the book you realize, “I’ve read this book before.” That’s perfectly
fine. It means you’re ready to reread it.
What are the books you’re rereading now?
That’s a good question. I’ll pull up my Kindle app as we talk. Usually I’m
always rereading some books in science.
I read Seven Brief Lessons On Physics. I think that was the name of it. I’ve
read that one at least twice. I’m rereading Sapiens again, because I love
that book so much. I’m pretty much always rereading something by either
J. Krishnamurti or Osho. Those are my favorite philosophers. I’m reading a
book on René Girard’s mimetic theory. It’s more of an overview book because
I couldn’t make it through his actual writings. I’m reading Tools of Titans, Tim
Ferriss’ book of what he learned from a lot of great performers.
I’m rereading Stories of Your Life and Others by Ted Chiang. It’s one of my
favorite sci-fi novels. I’m reading a book, Thermoinfocomplexity. It’s actually
by a friend of mine. It’s not published yet. I just finished reading Pre-Suasion,
or I should say I just finished skimming Pre-Suasion by Robert Cialdini. I
don’t think I needed to read the entire book to get the point, but it was still
good to read what I did. I recently reread The Lessons of History by Will and
Ariel Durant. It’s a great little history book.
I love that book.
I’m currently reading The Story of Philosophy, also by Will Durant. I have
a young kid now so I’ve got a lot of child-rearing books I use more as
reference material than anything else. I recently read some Emerson, some
Chesterfield. I’ve got a Leo Tolstoy book here. I’ve got another Osho book.
I’ve got Delusion Damage, which is this blog I used to love. I’ve got pieces of
it saved up. Alan Watts. Scott Adams. I reread God’s Debris, recently. Tao Te
Ching, a friend of mine, is rereading it, so I picked it up again. There’s tons.
I mean, I could go on and on. There’s Nietzsche’s book here. There’s The
Undercover Economist. The Richard Bach book. There’s some Jed McKenna
books. I was recently trying to reread Moby Dick and Hamlet, just to try and
get back into fiction, but I didn’t make it through either one.
Do you set aside time in your day to reread or to read at all? Is it like a
consistent thing or do you fit it in when you have time?
I read when I’m bored of everything else. The good news is I get bored very
easily. There is always a book to capture the imagination. Usually at night
time before I go to bed I’ll read, but it’s not a flawless thing. When I’m on
vacation I’ll read. If I’m sitting in a Lyft or an Uber, I’ll read.
Sometimes in the morning at home, after I’ve worked out, I’ll just read.
Sometimes when I wake up, I’ll just grab my phone and read. I’m not a very
disciplined person. I don’t really set these hard and fast rules for myself. The
good news is I just love to read. Because I love to read, whenever I’m bored
and I have time, I just do it. Thanks to the iPhone or the Kindle and the iPad,
they just make it really easy.
I’ve got two books here: Feynman, Perfectly Reasonable Deviations, by him,
and then Genius, which is a James Gleick book about Feynman. Just as we’re
talking, I’m clicking through and looking more.
The Evolution of Everything by Matt Ridley, one of my favorite authors. I’ve
read everything of his, and reread everything of his. A little Dale Carnegie in
here. The Three-Body Problem. Man’s Search for Meaning. There’s lots. Sex
at Dawn. There’s a lot of books out there.
Your Kindle sounds like my wet dream.
I’m going through it right now. It’s hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
books are downloaded. We could sit here the entire podcast and go through
them.
You’ve said before you think of books as throwaways. How did you come to
think about books like that and what impact has that had on what you read?
That’s really an impact of the Internet. Once the Internet came along, I think
it destroyed everyone’s attention span. Now all of humanity’s works are
available to you at any given time and you’re being interrupted constantly. Our
attention span goes down, our ability to focus goes down. At the same time,
we just become more judicious. We want the meat. The problem with books
is that, to write a book, to publish a physical, dead tree book, takes a lot of
work and effort and money. Sometimes people start wrapping long books
around simple ideas. Those are probably my least favorite books. That’s why I
avoid the whole business and self-help category because you generally have
one good idea and it’s buried in hundreds or thousands of pages and lots of
anecdotes.
What happened was I just noticed that some time in the late 90s, I stopped
reading as much as I used to and I started reading more blogs. I started
reading less books and more blogs. Great blogs, like Farnam Street or Kevin
Simler’s blog, Melting Asphalt, and so on, you get incredibly smart people
digestifying, simplifying, and writing these great things, but it’s only a page or
two or three pages. I got really into blogs, but then I’d stopped reading books.
A lot of the oldest wisdom is actually in books. With books, you’re now talking
about the combined works of all of humanity as opposed to just who happens
to be blogging right now. I realized I missed that.
Then with the Kindle and the iBooks coming along, that allowed me to start
treating books like I treat blogs. When I go to blog, I’ll actually skim through
lots of articles until I find one that looks really interesting and then I’ll read
that whole article all the way through and maybe take notes. Now I treat
books the same way. I’ll skim through a large number of books. I’ll put
them down. I’ll jump around, back, forward, middle, until I find a part that’s
interesting. Then I’ll just consume that piece. I won’t feeling guilty about
having to finish the entire book.
I just view it as a blog archive. A blog might have 300 posts on it and you could
read just the two, three, five that you need right now. I think you can think of a
book the same way. Then that opens the world wide web of books back open
to us instead of it being buried somewhere. Like many people, I know of a lot
of friends who are currently stuck on a book somewhere. 
If you ask people if they read, everybody says they read. Everybody says
they’re reading a book. They can answer which book they’re reading. The
reality is very few people actually read and actually finish books.
Yes.
I think that’s probably because of all of these societal and personal rules that
we’ve put up, like you must finish a book and you must read books that are
good for you, and you can’t read junk food books. This is a hot book right now
and so on. The reality is I don’t actually read that much compared to what
people think. I probably read one to two hours a day. That puts me in the top
.00001%. I think that alone accounts for any material success that I’ve had in
my life and any intelligence that I might have. Real people don’t read an hour
a day. Real people, I think, read a minute a day or less. Making it an actual
habit is the most important thing.
How you make it a habit doesn’t matter. It’s very much like exercise or
working out. Do something every day. It almost doesn’t matter what you do.
The people who are obsessing over should I be weight training or should I
be doing tennis or should I be doing Pilates or should I be doing the highintensity training method versus the happy body versus whatever, they’re
missing the point. The important thing is to do something every day. It doesn’t
matter what it is. I would argue the important thing is to read every day.
It almost doesn’t matter what you read. Eventually you will read enough
things, and your interests will lead your there, that it will dramatically
improve your life. Just like the best workout for you is the one that you’re
excited enough to do every day, the same way I would say the books or blogs
or Twitter or whatever, anything with ideas and information and learning, the
best ones to read are the ones that you’re excited about reading all the time.
Most of the people that I know that read quite a bit, they have a reading habit
like you. You’re described as a very habitual person, where did that come
from?
That might have come from the Tim Ferriss podcast. I don’t think I’m more
habitual than anybody else. I think human beings are entirely creatures of
habit. Young children are born with no habit loops. They’re essentially born
as blank slates. Then they habituate themselves to things and they learn
patterns and they get conditioned and they use that to get through everyday
life. Habits are good. Habits can allow you to background process certain
things so that your neocortex, your frontal lobe, stays available to solve brand
new problems.
We also unconsciously pick up habits in the background and we keep them
for decades. We may not realize that they’re bad for us until we’re ready to
move on them. To some extent, our attitude in life, our mood, our happiness
levels, depression levels, these are also habits. Do we judge people? How
often do we eat? What kind of food do we eat? Do we walk or do we sit? Do we
move? Do we exercise? Do we read? These are habits as well.
You absolutely need habits to function. You cannot solve every problem in life
as if it is the first time it’s thrown at you. What we do is we accumulate all
these habits. We put them in the bundle of identity, ego, ourselves, and then
we get attached to that. I’m Shane. This is the way I am. I’m Naval. This is the
way I am. It’s really important to be able to uncondition yourself, to be able to
take your habits apart and say, “Oh, okay, that’s a habit that I probably picked
up from when I was a toddler and I was trying to get my parents attention.
Now I’ve just reinforced it and reinforced it and reinforced it and I call it a part
of my identity.
Is it serving me anymore? Is it making me happier? Is it making me
healthier? Is it making me accomplish whatever I want to set out to
accomplish right now?” In fact, I would argue, I’m less habitual than most
people. I don’t like to structure my day. To the extent that I do have habits, I’m
trying to make them more deliberate rather than accidents of history.
What’s a habit that you’re trying to change right now? What are you working
on?
I did a lot of habit changes over the last few years. I’ve now got a daily
workout that I do, which is a great habit. I cut down heavily on drinking. It’s
not totally eliminated, but it’s mostly gone. I dropped caffeine. I’m not on the
paleo diet, although I’d like to be, so I’m on a variation on it that I call the
faileo diet. I try to be paleo, but I fail at it constantly. I don’t beat myself up
over it because I feel that even approximating toward it is better than where
I’ve been historically. Like that, I tried to build a meditation habit but I failed.
I have made a habit of being “meditative.” I’ve gone through lots of habits.
Probably the one that I currently would like to cultivate is doing yoga more
regularly. I haven’t formulated a plan around that.
By the way, I reject a lot of the stuff that’s being peddled around today about
how you perform and break habits. I know there’s this very popular book,
one that I even recommended, which talks about the science behind habits.
One of its depressing conclusions, I think this came of Stanford, was that you
can’t break habits, you can only replace them. That’s BS. I’ve definitely broken
habits completely. I think you can uncondition yourself. You can untrain
yourself. It’s just hard. It takes work. It takes effort. Usually the big habit
changes comes when there’s strong desire-motivators attached to them.
The yoga one I’m going to work on. I don’t yet have a great plan on that one. I
haven’t tackled that one properly yet.
A big habit the I’m working on, which is going to be really hard to explain in
any way that any normal human being will understand this, but I’m trying to
turn off my monkey mind. I think, when we’re born as children, we’re pretty
blank slates. We’re living very much in the moment. We’re essentially just
reacting to our environment through our instincts. We’re living in, what I
would call the “real world.” When puberty comes along, that’s the onset
of desire, it’s the first time you really, really want something and you start
long-range planning for it. Because of that, you start thinking a lot and start
building an identity and an ego to go and get what you want.
This is all normal and healthy. It’s part of being the human animal. I think
at some point it gets out of control and then we are constantly talking to
ourselves in our head. We’re playing little movies in our heads, walking
down the street, but no one’s actually there. Of course, if we started voicing
this thought in your head that you’re always having, you’d be a madman and
they’d lock you up.
The reality is if you walk down the street and there are a thousand people
in the street, I think all thousand are talking to themselves in their head at
any given point. They’re constantly judging everything that they see. They’re
playing back movies of things that happened to them yesterday. They’re living
in fantasy worlds of what’s going to happen tomorrow. They’re just pulled out
of base reality.
That could be good when you’re doing long-range planning. It can be good
when you’re solving problems. It’s good for the survival and replication
machines that we are. I think it’s actually very bad for your happiness. In
my mind, the mind should be a servant and a tool, not a master. It’s not
something that should be controlling me and driving me 24/7.
I’ve taken on this idea that I want to break the habit of uncontrolled thinking,
which is hard. If I say to you, “Don’t think of a pink elephant”, I just put a
pink elephant in your head. It’s an almost impossible problem. It’s more
something that has to be guided by feel, than guided by actual thinking or
thought process. I’m deliberately cultivating experiences, states of mind,
locations, activities, that will help me get out of my mind.
All of society does that to some extent. In some sense, the people chasing
thrills in action sports or flow states or orgasm or any of these states that
people really strive to get to, a lot of these are basically just trying to get out
of your own head. They’re trying to get away from that voice in your head and
this overdeveloped sense of self. At the very least, I do not want my sense of
self to continue to develop and become stronger as I get older. I want it to be
weaker and more muted so that I can live much more in present every day
reality and accept nature and the world for what it is and appreciate it very
much as a child would. Then not have to seek happiness through external
circumstances, chasing the fits of preconceived notion that I have.
Wow. There’s a lot there I want to ask questions on.
That’s a tough one. That will take years. That’s not a six-month habit. That’s a
ten-year habit.
Do you think there’s a difference between turning off versus suppressing your
monkey mind?
Absolutely. Suppression doesn’t work. When you try to suppress, that’s the
mind suppressing the mind. That’s just you playing games with yourself. I
think it’s a very hard problem.
I want to go back to kind of unconditioning. You basically stopped drinking
alcohol. How did you work on deprogramming yourself from the social settings
and environments that you’re in where alcohol is probably available all the
time and what benefits have you seen as a result? I mean, are you isolating
these habits when you’re changing them so you know, “Oh I sleep better
because I’m not ...”
The alcohol one is an interesting case study because the alcohol habit came
from two things. One was availability. Just being in situations where alcohol
is available and accepted and something you’re supposed to do. The second
is the desire. You want to do it because you’re trying to accomplish something
else. When I unpacked that, I realized a couple of things. The availability
came from, if I’m out at night in an environment where alcohol is being
served, that’s the availability. If you want to avoid that, stay in. Staying in is not
fun, so what do you do?
I started this daily workout regimen in the mornings. If you’re working out in
the mornings, you can’t stay up too late at night. If you can’t stay up too late
at night, you can’t be drinking too much. If you screw up a few times, then
your morning workout is terrible. You have a headache. You feel bad.
When you’re working out every day, you can checkpoint yourself very easily.
This exact thing that I do every single morning is suddenly harder, so
therefore I’m weakened for the alcohol from last night. The morning workout
checkpoint really helped me understand the consequences of consuming
alcohol before.
The more interesting question is why am I doing it? That basically boils
down to: I was doing it to survive longer in a social environment that I wasn’t
particularly happy in. I essentially had to stun my brain into submission.
There are better ways to do that. One of those is only associate with people
where you don’t have to drink to be around them. That really narrowed my
friend circle and it narrowed the kind of events that I go to. There’s a little
bit of a substitution effect. Some of what the substitution effect was I was
drinking so that I wouldn’t be thinking. What I went back to is, can I cultivate
these states of not thinking too much? If I can get there another way then that
will take away some of the urge to drink.
Then there’s some substitution. For example, I switched from hard alcohol
to red wine. Red wine is inherently self-limiting. You have two cocktails, the
next thing you want is another cocktail. You have two glasses of red wine, at
least for me, I usually have a headache. I’m done at that point. It’s very selflimiting.
Some of it is just a function of age. I’m 43 now. I don’t think I can make it
through a single glass of wine without having some negative consequence
build up. I still drink. I don’t believe in the words like never and always. I think
that’s a way of limiting yourself and self-disciplining yourself. It makes me
less free and less happy at some level. I just want to be naturally in a position
where I don’t need it and I don’t desire it. That’s kind of what I’ve been
working more on.
What habit would you say most positively impacts your life?
I think it’s the daily morning workout. That has been a complete gamechanger. It’s made me feel healthier, younger. It’s made me not go out late.
It came from one simple thing, which is everybody says, “I don’t have time.”
Basically whenever you throw any so-called good habit at somebody, they’ll
have an excuse for themselves. Usually the most common is, I don’t have
time. I don’t have time is just another way of saying, it’s not a priority. What
you really have to do is say is it a priority or not. If something is your number
one priority then you will get it. That’s just the way life works. If you’ve got
a fuzzy basket of 10 or 15 different priorities, you’re going to end up getting
none of them.
What I did there was I basically just said, “My number one priority in life,
above my happiness, above my family, above my work, is my own health. It
starts with my physical health.” Second, it’s my mental health. Third, it’s my
spiritual health. Then it’s my family’s health. Then it’s my family’s wellbeing.
After that, I can go out and do whatever I need to do with the rest of the world.
There’s a series of concentric circles starting out from me. Because my
physical health became my number one priority, then I could never say I don’t
have time. In the morning, I work out and however long it takes is how long
it takes. I do not start my day, and I don’t care if the world is imploding and
melting down, it can wait another 30 minutes until I’m done working out.
Do you take any breaks from that or is that every day?
It’s pretty much every day. There are a few days where I’ve had to take a break
because I’m traveling or I’m injured or sick or something. I can count on one
hand the number of breaks I take every year.
You mentioned happiness being one of your top priorities. What is happiness to
you? What does that mean? What does that word mean? Can you unpack that?
It’s a very evolving thing, I think, like all the great questions. When you’re
a little kid and you go to your mom and you say, “What happens when we
die? Is there a Santa Claus? Is there a God? Should be I happy? Who should
I marry?” Those kinds of things. There are no glib answers to that because
there are no answers that apply to everybody. These questions, the search for
truth, these kind of questions, they ultimately do have answers, but they have
personal answers. The answer that works for me is going to be nonsense to
you and vice versa. Whatever happiness means to me, it means something
different to you and it means something different to the listener. I think it’s
very important to explore what it is.
For some people, I know it’s a flow state. For some people, it’s satisfaction.
For some people, it’s a feeling of contentment. My definition keeps evolving.
The answer I would have given you a year ago will be different than what I tell
you now.
Today, I believe that happiness is, it’s really a default state. It’s what’s there
when you remove the sense that something is missing in your life. We are
highly judgmental, survival, and replication machines. We are constantly
walking around thinking I need this, I need that, trapped in the web of desires.
Happiness is that state when nothing is missing. When nothing is missing,
your mind shuts down and your mind stops running into the future or running
into the past to regret something or to plan something.
In that absence for a moment, you have internal silence. When you have
internal silence, then you are content and you are happy. Feel free to
disagree, again, it’s different for everybody, but people believe mistakenly that
happiness is about positive thoughts and positive actions.
The more I’ve read, the more I’ve learned, the more I’ve experienced, because
I verify this for myself, every positive thought essentially holds within it a
negative thought. It is a contrast to something negative. The Tao Te Ching
says this more articulately than I ever could, but it’s all duality and polarity.
If I say I’m happy, that means that I was sad at some point. If I say he’s
attractive, then that means that somebody else is unattractive. Every positive
thought even has a seed of a negative thought within it and vice versa, which
is why a lot of greatness in life comes out suffering. You have to view the
negative before you can aspire to and then appreciate the positive.
All of that said, long winded, to me happiness is not about positive thoughts.
It’s not about negative thoughts. It’s about the absence of desire, especially
the absence of desire for external things. The fewer desires I can have, the
more I can accept the current state of things, the less my mind is moving
because the mind really exists in motion towards the future or the past. The
more present I am, the happier and more content I will be. If I latch onto that,
if I say, “Oh, I’m happy now”, and I want to stay happy, then I’m going to drop
out of that happiness. Now, suddenly, the mind is moving. It’s trying to attach
to something. It’s trying to create a permanent situation out of a temporary
situation.
Happiness to me is mainly not suffering, not desiring, not thinking too much
about the future or the past, really embracing the present moment and
the reality of what is, the way it is. Nature has no concept of happiness or
unhappiness. To a tree, there is no right or wrong. There is no good or bad.
Nature follows unbroken mathematical laws and a chain of cause and effect
from the big bang to now. Everything is perfect exactly the way it is. It is
only in our particular minds that we’re unhappy or not happy and things are
perfect or imperfect because of what we desire.
I’ve also come to believe in the complete and utter insignificance of the self,
and I think that helps a lot. For example, if you thought you were the most
important thing in the universe, then you would have to bend the entire
universe to your will. If you’re the most important thing in the universe, then
how could it not conform to your desires. If it doesn’t conform to your desires,
something is wrong.
However, if you view yourself as a bacteria or an amoeba or if you view all of
your works as writing on water or building castles in the sand, then you have
no expectation from how life should actually be. Life is just the way it is. Then
you accept that and you have no cause to be happy or unhappy. Those things
almost don’t apply.
What you’re left with in that neutral state is not neutrality. I think people
think, “Oh, that would be a very bland existence.” No, this is the existence
that little children live. If you look at little children, on balance, they’re
generally pretty happy because they are really immersed into the
environment and the moment without any thought of how it should be given
their personal preferences and desires. I think the neutral state is actually a
perfection state. One can be very happy as long as one isn’t too caught up in
their own heads.
What does your internal monologue go like when you find yourself trying to
attach to something by default?
I try to keep an eye on my internal monologue. It doesn’t always work. In the
computer programming sense, I try to run my brain in debugging mode as
much as possible. When I’m talking to someone, like I’m talking to you right
now, or when I’m engaged in a group activity, it’s almost impossible because
your brain has too many things to handle. If I’m by myself, like just this
morning, I’m brushing my teeth and I start thinking forward to the podcast.
I started going through this little fantasy where I imagined you asking me a
bunch of questions and I was fantasy answering them. Then I caught myself. I
put my brain in debug mode and just watched every little instruction go by.
I said, “Why am I fantasy future planning? Why can’t I just stand here and
brush my teeth?” It’s the awareness that my brain was running off in the
future and planning some fantasy scenario out of ego. I was like, “Well, do I
really care if I embarrass myself on Shane’s podcast? Who cares? I’m going
to die anyway. This is all going to go to zero and I won’t remember anything,
so this is pointless.”
At that point, I shut down and I went back to brushing my teeth. Then I was
noticing how good the toothbrush was and how good it felt. Then the next
moment I’m off to thinking something else. I have to look at my brain again
and say, “Do I really need to solve this problem right now?”
The reality is that 95% of what my brain runs off and tries to do, I don’t need
to tackle at that exact moment. In fact, if it’s like a muscle, then I’ll be better
off resting it and being at peace and then when a particular problem arises,
immerse myself in it. What I would rather dedicate myself to is, for example,
right now as we’re talking, to be completely lost in the conversation and to
be 100% focused on this as opposed to thinking about, “Oh, when I brushed
my teeth, did I do it the right way?” or planning something else in my mind. I
think the ability is to singularly focus is related to the ability to lose yourself
and be present, happy, and actually, ironically, more effective.
That’s fascinating. It’s almost like a relativity issue where you’re taking
yourself out of a certain frame and you’re just moving it over to another frame
and watching things from a different perspective, even though you’re in your
own mind.
I think a lot of, for example, like Buddhists talk about, is awareness versus
the ego. What they’re really talking about is you can think of your brain, your
consciousness, as a multi-layered mechanism. There’s kind of a core base
kernel level OS that’s running. Then there’s applications that are running on
top. I like to think of it as computer and geek speak.
I’m actually going back to my awareness level of OS, which is always calm,
always peaceful, and generally happy and content. I’m trying to stay in
that mode and not activate the monkey mind, which is always worried and
frightened and anxious, but serves incredible purpose. I’m trying not to
activate that program until I need it. When I need it, I want to just focus on
that program. If I’m running it 24/7, all the time, I’m wasting energy and it
becomes me. I am more than that.
I think another thing that spirituality or religion or Buddhism or anything
you follow will teach you over time is that you are more than just your mind.
You are more than just your habits. You are more than just your preferences.
You’re a level of awareness. You’re a body. Modern humans, we don’t live
enough in our body. We don’t live enough in our awareness. We live too much
in this internal monologue in our heads. All of which, by the way, is just
programmed into you by society and by the environment from when you were
younger.
You are basically a bunch of hardware DNA written, that then reacted to
environmental effects when you were younger. Then you recorded the things
that were good and bad and you use that to prejudge everything that’s going
to be thrown against you. Then you’re using that to constantly try and predict
and change the future.
As you get older and older, the sum of these preferences that you’ve
accumulated is very, very large. Some of these reactions, habitual reactions,
that you’ve accumulated is very, very large, and then they end up as runaway
freight trains that control your mood. We should control our own moods. Why
don’t we study how to control our moods? What a masterful thing that would
be if you could say, “Well, right now I would like to be in the curious state”,
and then you can genuinely set yourself into the curious state. Or you say, “I
want to be in a mourning state. I’m mourning a loved one and I want to grieve
for them, but I really want to grieve. I really want to feel that. I don’t want to
be distracted right by computer programming problem that’s due tomorrow.”
I think that the mind itself is a muscle and it can be trained and it can be
conditioned. It has just been haphazardly conditioned by society out of our
control. If you look at it with awareness and intent, and it’s a 24/7 job, you’re
working at it every moment of every day, I think you can unpack your own
mind and your emotions and your thoughts and your reactions and you can
start re-configuring. You can start rewriting this program to what you want.
You mentioned before in one of your interviews that you have foundational
values, but you didn’t elaborate. I’m curious. What are those?
It’s a good question. I’ve never actually listed them or articulated them.
I would define values, first of all, as a set of things that you will not
compromise on. Foundational values to me are things that I’ve looked at very,
very carefully about myself and I’ve deliberately chosen and said, “You know
what, this is a habit. This is a way of life. I’m not going to compromise on it.
I’m going to stay this way forever. I don’t want to live life any other way.”
I’ve never fully enumerated them, but examples of them, I think honesty is
a core, core, core value. To give you examples of what I mean by honesty is I
want to be able to just be me. I never want to be in an environment or around
people where I have to watch what I say.
If I disconnect what I’m thinking from what I’m saying, that creates multiple
threads in my mind, that means that I’m no longer in the moment, and that
means that I now have to be future-planning or past-regretting every time I’m
talking to somebody. Anyone around whom I can’t be fully honest, I don’t want
to be around.
Another example of a foundational value is I don’t believe in any short-term
thinking or dealing. Let’s say I’m doing business with somebody and they
think in a short-term manner with somebody else, then I don’t want to do
business with that person anymore. I think all the benefits in life come from
compound interest, whether in money or in relationships or love or health or
activities or habits. I only want to be around people that I know I’m going to be
around with for the rest of my life. I only want to work on things that I know
have long-term payout.
Another one is I only believe in peer relationships. I don’t believe in
hierarchical relationships. I don’t want to be above anybody and I don’t want
to be below anybody. If I can’t treat someone like a peer and if they can’t treat
me like peer, then I just don’t want to interact with that human. Another one
is I don’t believe in anger anymore. That was something that was good when I
was young and full of testosterone, but now I always like the Buddhist saying
that anger is a hot coal that you hold in your hand while waiting to throw it
at somebody. I don’t want to be angry and I don’t want to be around angry
people. I just cut them out of my life. I’m not judging them. I went through a
lot of anger, too, and they have to work through it on their own. Go be angry at
someone else somewhere else.
I don’t know if that necessarily falls into the classical definition of values, but
it’s a set of things that I won’t compromise on and that I just live my entire life
by. I think everybody has values and a lot of finding great relationships, great
coworkers, great lovers, wives, husbands, is finding other people where your
values line up and then the little things don’t matter.
Generally I find that if people are fighting or quarreling about something, it’s
because their values don’t line up. If their values lined up, the little things
wouldn’t matter.
How is radical honesty? How radical is your honesty and how has that kind of
impacted your life?
I mean, it’s pretty honest. I’m not like, I think Ray Dalio from Bridgewater is
shamelessly radically honest. I’m not going to go and call somebody ugly to
their face. I’m not trying to make a big show of it. I’m not trying to say, “Hey,
I’m so honest that I’m going to shock you.” What radical honesty just means
that I want to be free. Part of being free means that I can say what I think and
think what I say. They’re highly congruent and integrated. Richard Feynman
famously said, “You should never, ever fool anybody and you are the easiest
person to fool.” The moment you tell somebody else something that’s not
honest, you’ve lied to yourself. Then you’ll start believing your own lie. Then
that will disconnect you from reality and take you down the wrong road.
It’s really important for me to be honest. I don’t go out of my way volunteering
negative or nasty things. I would combine radical honesty with an old rule
that Warren Buffet has, which is praise specifically, criticize generally. I try to
follow this. I don’t always follow it, but I think I follow it enough that it made
a difference in my life. If you have a criticism of someone, then don’t criticize
the person, criticize the general approach or criticize that class of activities.
If you have to praise somebody, then always try and find the person who is
the best example of what you’re praising and then that praise that person,
specifically. That way people’s egos and identities, which we all have, don’t
work against you, they work for you.
Have your values changed at all or have you given more thought to them since
becoming married and becoming a parent? How has that changed you?
Values, almost by definition, don’t change that much over time. It takes some
time for you to figure out your own foundational values. I think everybody has
them, it’s just that maybe we’re not that aware of them until later. Mine have
changed a little bit, but not a lot.
My wife is an incredibly lovely and family-oriented person, and so am I. That
was one of the foundational values that brought us together. The moment you
have a child, it’s this really weird thing, but it answers the built-in meaning
of life, purpose of life, question. All of a sudden, the most important thing in
the universe moves from being in your body into moving into the child’s body.
That changes you. Your values inherently become a lot less selfish.
I would say that the biggest such change was when I was younger, I really,
really valued freedom. Freedom was one of my core, core values. Ironically, it
still is. It’s probably one of my top three values, but it’s a different definition
of freedom. My old definition was freedom to, freedom to do anything I want.
Freedom to do whatever I feel like, whenever I feel like. Now I would say
that the freedom that I’m looking for is internal freedom. It’s freedom from.
It’s freedom from reaction. It’s freedom from feeling angry. It’s freedom
from being sad. It’s freedom from being forced to do things. I’m looking for
freedom from internally and externally, whereas before I was looking for
freedom to.
I like that a lot. What’s the biggest mistake you’ve ever made in your life and
how did you recover?
I’ve made a class of mistakes that I would summarize in the same way. I
made the class of mistakes and it was obvious some of the mistakes were
only in hindsight through one exercise, which is you’ve probably heard when
you’re 30, what advice would you give your 20-year-old self? When you’re
40, what advice would you give your 30-year-old self? If you do that exercise
decade by decade or, maybe if you’re younger, you can do it in fives. Really sit
down and say, “Okay, 2007, what was I doing? How was I feeling? 2008, what
was I doing? How was I feeling? 2009, what was I doing? How was I feeling?
At least for me, this remarkable consistency emerged. That consistency
was that everything that I was doing, I should have still done, but with less
emotion, and especially less anger.
I used to be very angry when I was younger, but especially with less emotion.
Life is going to play out the way it’s going to play out. Some good, some bad.
Most of it is actually just up to your interpretation. You’re born, you have a set
of sensory experiences, and then you die. How you choose to interpret those
sensory inputs is up to you, and different people interpret them in different
ways.
Really, I wish I had done all of the same things but with less emotion and less
anger. The most celebrated example would be when I was younger I started
a company and this company did well, but I didn’t do well, so I sued some of
the people involved. It was a good outcome for me in the end and everything
worked out okay, but there was a lot of angst and a lot of anger.
Today, what I would do is I wouldn’t go down the angst and the anger. I would
have just walked up to the people and said, “Look, this is what happened. This
is what I’m going to do. This is how I’m going to do it. This is what’s fair. This
is what’s not.”
I would have realized that the anger and the emotion themselves are this
huge consequence is just completely unnecessary. Now I’m just trying to
learn from that and to do the same things that I think are the right thing to
do, but to do them without anger and to do them with a very long-term point
of view.
I think if you take a very long-term point of view and if you take the emotion
out of it, then I wouldn’t consider those things mistakes anymore. Other than
that, the perspective I like to adopt is that everything that I did and everything
that was done to me, and there’s some impossible inseparable combination,
brought me to this exact moment here today, talking to you. This is a good
moment.
It’s a great moment.
Whatever set of circumstances conspired to bring us here were good because
here I am.
Was there a moment you would say when you realized that you could control
how you interpreted? I think one of the problems that a lot of people have is
they don’t recognize that they can control, not what happens to them per se,
but how they respond and how they interpret a situation.
I think everyone knows it’s possible. The reason they know it’s possible
is, there’s a great Osho lecture, that’s titled The Attraction of Drugs is
Spiritual. He talks about why do people do drugs, everything from alcohol to
psychedelics to cannabis to, you name it, and they’re doing it to control their
mental state. They’re doing it to control how they react. Sometimes it’s worse
and sometimes it’s better. Some people drink because then they don’t care as
much or they’re pot-heads because they can zone out or they do psychedelics
so they can feel very present or connected to nature or what have you. The
attraction of drugs is spiritual.
To some extent, we already know that we can control our internal state. We
just use external bioactive substances to do it. Now, there are a lot more
techniques that are out there in the public domain, many of them dug up from
older times. These range from cognitive therapy and behavioral psychology,
to meditation to taking long walks in nature. You can control your mental
state. It’s just we’re used to doing it by hacking our external circumstances to
then come back around and control our mental state. For example, there’s a
famous line that says that, “All of man’s problems arise because he can’t sit
by himself in a room for 30 minutes”.
Pascal, yeah.
Obviously this applies to women, too. Exactly. If a man or a woman can sit by
themselves on a cushion for 30 minutes, and it’s hard, it’s really hard to do,
that’s meditation, you are essentially struggling with and controlling your
internal state.
The first thing to realize is that you can actually observe your mental state.
The advantage of meditation is not that you’re suddenly going to gain the
superpower to control your internal state, it’s that you will recognize just how
out of control your mind is. It is like a monkey flinging feces, that’s running
around the room, making trouble, shouting, breaking things. It’s completely
uncontrollable. It’s an out-of-control mad person.
You have to see this mad creature in operation before you feel a certain
distaste towards it and you start separating yourself from it. In that
separation is liberation. When you realize that, “Oh, I don’t want to be that
person. Why am I so out of control?” Just that awareness alone calms you
down. There are many techniques one can use. Another one, for example,
that I think a lot of smart people say is, “If you’re angry about something,
or if you get an unhappy email and you want to respond, don’t respond for
24 hours.” What does that do? You calm down. The emotions subside, the
hormones go down, and you’re in a better mental state 24 hours later. I think
people already know this, but we just don’t act on it because, socially, we’re
not conditioned to act on it.
Socially, we’re told, “Go work out. Go look good.” That’s a multi-player
competitive game. Other people can see if I’m doing a good job or not. We’re
told, “Go make money. Go buy a big house.” Again, external monkey-player
competitive game. When it comes to learn to be happy, train yourself to be
happy, completely internal, no external progress, no external validation, 100%
you’re competing against yourself, single-player game. We are such social
creatures, we’re more like bees or ants, that we’re externally programmed
and driven, that we just don’t know how to play and win at these single-player
games anymore. We compete purely on multi-player games. The reality is
life is a single-player game. You’re born alone. You’re going to die alone. All
of your interpretations are alone. All your memories are alone. You’re gone in
three generations and nobody cares. Before you showed up, nobody cared. It’s
all single-player.
I think Buffet has a great example of that when he gives the, “Do you want to
be the world’s best lover and known as the worst, or the world’s worst lover
and known as the best?”, in reference to an inner or external score card.
Exactly right. All the real score cards are internal. The sad thing is we sit
there, like jealousy. Jealousy was a very hard emotion for me to overcome.
When I was young, I had a lot of jealousy in me. By and by, I learned to get
rid of it. It still crops up every now and then. It’s such a poisonous emotion
because, at the end of the day, you’re no better off, you’re unhappier, and
the person you’re jealous of is still successful or good-looking or whatever
they are. The real breakthrough for me, was when I realized, at a personal,
fundamental level, the problem with these kinds of podcasts is I can give glib
answers all day long, but you have to discover your own personal answer.
Your personal answer is going to be different than mine. It’ll speak to you.
The one that I discovered that spoke to me was the day I realized that all
these people that I was jealous of, I couldn’t just cherry-pick and choose little
aspects of their life. I couldn’t say I want his body, I want her money, I want
his personality. You have to be that person. Do you want to actually be that
person with all of their reactions, their desires, their family, their happiness
level, their outlook on life, their self-image? If you’re not willing to do a
wholesale, 24/7, 100% swap with who that person is, then there is no point in
being jealous.
I think that’s a great way to look at it.
Once I came to that realization, jealousy faded away because I don’t want to
be anybody else. I’m perfectly happy being me. By the way, even that is under
my control. To be happy being me. It’s just there’s no social rewards for it.
There’s a lot of internal rewards.
It’s almost antisocial rewards. When you’re working on your inner stuff,
people don’t love that. It’s not that they dislike it, your friends of course
support you, but they’re not getting anything out of it.
Even when I look at my own peer group and to the extent that they’re working
on themselves, and everyone in their 40s at some level is, most of them are
engaged in group activities. Hey, let’s do a group meditation. Hey, let’s go
to this group event. Hey, let’s go to this group lecture. I keep coming back
to this one line that I read, like everything I just read, which said, “Only the
individual transcends.” Nobody reaches enlightenment or internal happiness
or does serious internal work in group settings. It is a very lonely kind of
task. To some extent, I think that people who are constantly looking for social
affirmation in their internal work aren’t that serious about it. It’s fine. I’m not
judging. They’re craving more social interaction than they are really craving
internal work.
What big ideas have you changed your mind on in the last few years?
There’s a lot on kind of the life level. There’s a couple, obviously, in the
business level. I think on a more practical basis, I’ve just stopped believing in
macroeconomics. I studied economics in school and computer science. There
was a time when I thought I was going to be a PhD in economics and all of
that. The further I get, the more I realize macroeconomics is a combination
of voodoo complex systems and politics. You can find macroeconomists that
take every side of every argument. I think that discipline, because it doesn’t
make falsifiable predictions, which is the hallmark of science, because it
doesn’t make falsifiable predictions, it’s become corrupted.
You never have the counterexample on the economy. You can never take the
US economy and run two different experiments at the same time. Because
there’s so much data, people kind of cherry-pick for whatever political
narrative they’re trying to push. To the extent that people spend all their time
watching the macroeconomy or the fed forecasts or which way the stocks are
going to go the next year, is it going to be a good year or bad year, that’s all
junk. It’s no better than astrology. In fact, it’s probably even worse because it’s
less entertaining. It’s just more stress-inducing. I think of macroeconomics
as a junk science. All apologies to macroeconomists.
That said, microeconomics and game theory are fundamental. I don’t think
you can be successful in business or even navigating through most of our
modern capital society without an extremely good understanding of supply
and demand and labor versus capital and game theory and tit for tat and
those kinds of things. Macroeconomics is a religion that I gave up, but there
are many others. I’ve changed my mind on death, on the nature of life, on the
purpose of life, on marriage. I was originally not someone who wanted to be
married and have kids. There have been a lot of fundamental changes. The
most practical one is I gave up macro and I embraced micro.
I would say that’s not just true in macroeconomics, that true in
everything. I don’t believe in macro-environmentalism, I believe in microenvironmentalism. I don’t believe in macro-charity. I believe in micro-charity.
I don’t believe in macro improving the world. There’s a lot of people out there
who get really fired up about I’m going to change the world, I’m going to
change this person, I’m going to change the way people think.
I think it’s all micro. It’s like change yourself, then maybe change your family
and your neighbor before you get into abstract concepts about I’m going to
change the world.
What part of your base knowledge that you have today, that you believe, do you
consider the least solid or most likely to change over the coming years?
That’s a good question. I try not to have too much that I’ve pre-decided upon.
I think that creating identities and labels locks you in and keeps you from
seeing the truth.
I used to identify as libertarian, but then I would have to find myself defending
positions that I hadn’t really thought through just because they’re a part of
libertarian canon. The reality is that, if all of your beliefs line up into neat
little bundles, you should be highly suspicious because they’re prepackaged
and put together.
I don’t like to self-identify in almost any level anymore. That keeps me from
having too many of these so-called stable beliefs. It’s hard for me to point to
something that I think is shaky because if I thought it was really shaky then I
wouldn’t stand on it.
I guess the areas where I’m becoming least certain is, I would call it, the
grand category of how should we organize society beliefs. Everybody has
them. Some people think we should be communists. Some people are
capitalists. Some are anarchists. Some say we need a larger welfare state,
we need universal healthcare, and basic income. Others say no. I think the
entire class of beliefs, they’re unfalsifiable, they’re almost religious. They’re
things that people got into when they were young. Nobody actually knows
which system is the better one. Nobody actually knows which one maximizes
happiness versus output versus whatever.
I know there’s a lot of smart economists and people studying it. There’s a lot
of good data in science. At the end of the day, and the more I look into it, the
more I’ve come away saying, “Well, maybe I don’t know how best to organize
society.”
Maybe society should not have just one organization, but should have
multiple organizations so you can choose and you can go into whichever
society where you are most bound the thrive. I don’t think there is a single
right answer for human culture in society anymore, except to the extent the
given the increasingly destructive power of technology. On a long enough time
scale, you can create a nuclear weapon. On a long enough time scale, you
can create a singularity in your backyard as part of your high school physics
project.
I think as a human race, we do have to get past this idea that we’re separate
organisms and almost get in some kind of a multicellular organism
situation, otherwise we’ll just destroy ourselves. It will just be too easy to
blow ourselves up. That obviously runs very, very counter to my libertarian
instincts of everyone should be free and do whatever they want, etc. etc. 
I just don’t know how to organize society anymore. I think any beliefs that I
have, any remnant beliefs that I have from being younger about the optimal
way to organize society, would probably be wrong.
The future thriving society that we end up with, that may be a thousand years
from now, will probably look like something that I would argue very strongly
against today because it will have no room for the individual.
Maybe you can explain for listeners the singularity and kind of what your
thoughts are around that.
The singularity is this idea that technological change is accelerating and at
some point the acceleration gets so great that there’s massive change in our
lifetimes. We create things like general AI. We start living forever.
The nature of who we are as humans changes the consequence of that. It’s
most associated with the general AI. If we could produce a general purpose
artificial intelligence, that artificial intelligence could then hack its own
code, make itself smarter, and out evolve us to the point where we are either
obsolete or immortal or something in between.
My thoughts on it, I think it’s fanciful to say the least. Nick Bostrom wrote a
very famous book called Superintelligence, which lays out the paths to this.
There are good rebuttals to superintelligence, so I wouldn’t just read that
book breathless and wide-eyed and believe everything. There are people like
in The Singularity Institute who are looking forward to this coming.
I think it’s religion for nerds. It’s got all the same characteristics. It’s
unfalsifiable until it happens. It basically says the chosen ones will be saved.
The world is going to end. We will be immortal.
Where have we had heard this before?
Exactly. It’s very hard to tell apart from a biblical kind of story. I find the
people who are pushing it the most are what I would call sort of armchair
technologists. They might understand a little bit of science, but these are not
the PhDs and physicists who are pushing this. It’s not like the Fields Medal
winning mathematicians who is pushing this. I was trained in a little bit of
science and I consider myself an amateur scientist. I know just enough to
know how little we know.
Physics still can’t solve the three-body problem. Collide 3 billard balls
together, can’t tell you what happens. We cannot properly model complex
systems. We can’t tell the weather next week. We still can’t solve the vast
majority of chronic diseases. We’re just starting to connect the gut and the
brain and bacteria in our system together.
There is so much complexity in nature and humans have just begun to
scratch the surface. To believe that we are going to sort of go into this world
of perfection through technology I think is far-fetched.
Let’s talk about AI. Everyone is talking about AI. None of these people have
written real code. We are no closer to creating a general AI, I think, than we
were 20 years ago. There are actual huge advances that have been made in
specific AI, but these are data processing problems. Basically if I dump huge
amounts of real world images into a neural network, then I can do better
image recognition, no question. That is real. That is a data-driven solution.
The algorithms haven’t gotten any better. The structure of how the human
brain works and how the human body works is still so far advanced beyond
our machine capabilities that, certainly, if there’s going to be a singularity, it’s
not going to happen in my lifetime.
I think in that sense some things like the singularity are pernicious. They’re
pernicious for the same reason that the afterlife is pernicious. It takes you
out of the moment. It gives you hope for the future so you stop living for today
and you start living for tomorrow. I know that doesn’t sound like much, but
it’s actually a big deal.
At any given time, when you’re walking down the streets, a very small
percentage of your brain is focused on the present. The rest is future planning
or regretting the past. That’s keeping you from an incredible experience. It’s
keeping you from seeing the beauty in everything and for being grateful for
where you are.
I think it can literally destroy your happiness if you spend all your time living
in delusions of the future. I do think the singularity thing is good in the sense
that it pushes forward technological advancement. We put more resources on
it. We spend more time developing some of the great things as a human race,
some of the great technologies, that we can take advantage of. In that sense,
anything that pushes science forward is a good thing.
I think it’s delusional to think that you’re somehow going to be saved before
you die by some combination of AI and magic science. You just have to live the
life you have.
That’s pretty profound. Even when you’re living backwards, you’re not
really living, right? You kind of have to be in the moment to have any sort of
happiness.
There is actually nothing but this moment. No one has ever gone back in time
and no one has ever been able to predict the future successfully in any way
that matters. Literally, the only thing that exists is this exact point where you
are in space at that the exact time that you happen to be. Like all the great
profound truths, it’s all paradoxes. Any two points are infinitely different. Any
moment is perfectly unique. That moment itself slips by so quickly that you
can’t grab it.
What’s your opinion on the current education system? When I ask people
on Twitter what they wanted to ask you, this question came up a couple of
times, which was: How would you fix it? What’s your opinion on the education
system? What are your thoughts around that?
I think there’s no question, it’s completely obsolete. The education system
is a path-dependent outcome from the need for daycare, from the need for
prisons for college age males who would otherwise overrun society and
cause a lot of havoc. The original medieval universities had guard towers that
faced inwards for example.
I did not know that.
You have to put a curfew in there and you have to lock up the young 18-yearold males before they go out with swords and daggers and create trouble.
College and schools and the way we think about them, they come from a
time period when books were rare. Knowledge was rare. Babysitting was
rare. Crime was common. Violence was prevalent. There was no such thing
as self-guided learning. I think schools are just byproducts of these kinds
of institutions. Now we have the Internet, which is the greatest weapon of
knowledge ever created, completely interconnected. It’s very easy to learn.
If you actually have the desire to learn, everything is on the Internet. You can
go on Khan Academy. You can get MIT and Yale lectures online. You can get all
the coursework and get interactivity. You can read blogs by brilliant people.
You can read all these great books.
The ability to learn, the means of learning, the tools of learning, are abundant
and infinite. It’s the desire that’s incredibly scarce.
I don’t think that schools matter for self-motivated students. What the
schools matter for is wanting to keep the kids out of the parents hair while
the parents go to work. It creates socialization because kids want to be
around their peers and they want to learn how to operate in the society of
their peers.
I think if it’s purely learning you’re after, that learning can be done much
more either on your own or through the Internet or by uniting through the
Internet with like-minded groups. I think that’s one problem with the current
educational system.
The second problem is what do you choose to learn? The current educational
system has to have a one-size fits all model. It has to say you have to learn X
now and then you have to Y.
To give you examples of where this is obsolete, memorization. It being an age
of Google and smartphones, memorization is obsolete. Why should you be
memorizing the Battle of Trafalgar? Why should you be memorizing what the
capital of this or that state is? We still put undue weight on that just because
that’s the way it’s always been done and we lived in a pre-Google world.
Another example is how when we’re moving along at a certain pace, not
everyone, but I’m sure 90% of your listeners have had this happen to them,
which is they were learning mathematics. At some point they were keeping
up, they were doing arithmetic, then they were doing geometry, then they did
trigonometry, and then they did pre-calc and then they did calc.
Somewhere in there they got lost. Somewhere in there, while building the
massive edifice, the logical structure that mathematics is, they missed one
lesson, they missed one concept, they missed five classes or their brain
couldn’t think a certain way that something was being explained to them. It
should have been explained visually, but it was being explained numerically
or it should have been explained symbolically and it was being explained in
cartography or what have you. They were not able to keep up.
The moment you lose that rung in mathematics, the moment you miss
that rung in the ladder, you can’t go to the next one. Now the next one,
the teacher’s like, “Okay we’re done with pre-calculus, now we’re moving
on to calculus.” You’re saying, “Wait, I didn’t understand pre-calculus. I
didn’t understand how pre-calculus leads from trigonometry to calculus.
I missed that whole part.” Now you get to calculus, you don’t understand
the fundamentals, and now you’re reduced to memorization. Now you’re
like, “DX, DY. When I see the symbol, I do this.” Now you’ve lost the actual
learning. You’ve lost the connection to the underlying principles.
I think learning should be about learning the basics in all the fields and
learning them really well over and over. Life is mostly about applying the
basics and only doing the advanced stuff in the things that you truly love and
where you understand the basics inside out. That’s not how our system is
built.
We teach all these kids calculus and they walk out not understanding
calculus at all. Really they would have been better off served doing arithmetic
and basic computer programming the entire time. I think there’s a pace of
learning issue.
Then there’s finally a what to learn. There’s a whole set of things we don’t
even bother trying to teach. We don’t teach nutrition. We don’t teach cooking.
We don’t teach how to be in happy, positive relationships. We don’t teach
how to keep your body healthy and fit. We just say sports. We don’t teach
happiness. We don’t teach meditation. Maybe we shouldn’t teach some of
these things because different kids will have different aptitudes, but maybe
we should. Maybe we should teach practical construction of technology.
Maybe everyone in their science project, instead of building a little chemistry
volcano, maybe you should be building a smartphone.
We haven’t kept up. I have to believe that we can change the system, but you
never change a system by taking the existing thing and reworking it. I’ve been
in Silicon Valley and tech business long enough to know that you’re better
off changing it just by creating something brand new. One fantasy idea I’ve
had is, after I’m done with AngelList or if I have more time on my hands, I
would like to create a successor to the One Laptop Project. In MIT, Nicholas
Negroponte had the one laptop per child project.
Then I saw this fascinating write-up. This was really a long time ago, maybe
even five years ago, maybe it was in The Economist or somewhere. It was
a story about how they left a box full of unopened Android tablets in a little
village in Pakistan.
When they came back months later, the kids have opened up the box. They’ve
all figured out how to boot up the tablets. They’ve hacked them. They’ve
gotten past the user administration login. They’ve installed a whole bunch
of apps. They’ve got a little economy set up. The older kids are teaching the
younger kids. They’re teaching their grandmothers how to run businesses.
They’re surfing the web. They’ve taught themselves English. Kids are learning
machines. They just need the tools.
To that end, what I would love to do is create a very low-cost, very rugged,
easily powered, cheap Android tablet that’s hard to destroy and basically
distribute them around the world with prebuilt learning applications so that
you can literally fire one up and it works with you interactively. In 30 seconds,
it figures out what language you speak, if any, if speech is symbolic, and
what level of aptitude are you at. Are you a second grader, third grader, fifth
grader? Of course, it varies by different discipline. Then it lets you dive into
and let you learn anything you want that will make your life better.
Just on the edge of your competency.
Exactly. It always keeps you on the edge. It always keeps pushing you. Then
you can network in all the teachers of the world. Anyone who wants to be a
teacher can contribute. It’s not just Salman Khan doing Khan Academy.
Essentially you could network connect all of the teachers of the world and
all of the students of the world using tablets and do it at the pace and level
where it is essentially customized for each child. They’ll learn the things that
have a practical outcome in their life. I know there’s an advantage to liberal
arts education of pushing things that people don’t necessarily want to learn
on their own, but they have to have some desire for it. It’s better to wait until
they think they are ready and then give it all to them. I think that’s the way
that learning sticks. That’s the kind of project that I’d like to work on, but I
don’t think it’s solvable with the current school system.
I hope you get a chance to work on that. I think that would be a phenomenal
impact to the world.
I think it would be fun. I’m thinking about this now more because I have a
young infant son and honestly I don’t want to send him to school.
You mentioned a couple of physics books in the start of the interview here, how
do you as an adult go about learning new subjects, you specifically?
Mostly, I just stay on the basics. Even when I’m learning physics or science,
I’m sticking to the basics. I’ll read concepts for fun. I’m more likely to do
something that has arithmetic in it than calculus. I’m not going to be a great
physicist at this point. Maybe in the next lifetime or my kid will do it, but it’s
too late for me. I have to stick to what I enjoy. What I love about science is
mathematics is the language of nature.
Science is, to me, the study of truth. It is the only true discipline because it
makes falsifiable predictions. It actually changes the world. Applied science
becomes technology and technology is what separates us from the animals
and allows us to have things like cell phones and houses and cars and heat
and electricity.
Science to me is the study of truth and mathematics is the language of
science and nature.
In that sense, I’m not religious, but I’m spiritual. To me, that is the most
devotional thing that I could do, to study the laws of the universe. The same
kick that some guy might get out of being in Mecca or Medina and bowing
to the prophet, I get that same feeling of awe and that same small sense of
self when I study science. For me, it’s unparalleled and I’d rather stay at the
basics. This is the beauty of reading.
By the way, when I view my books on the Kindle, I skip 2/3 of them. The
reason I skip 2/3 is because they’re kind of embarrassing. They don’t sound
like good books to read. They’ll sound like trivial or silly or whatever. Who
cares? I don’t have to tell everybody everything I read. I read all kinds of stuff
that other people consider junk or even reprehensible. I read all kinds of stuff
that I disagree with because they’re mind bending.
I found myself in some random, dark hole in Twitter the other day where I
was reading this guys tweets and was like, “Wow. He’s really smart. He’s
really interesting. He’s very clever.” I was like, “Wait a minute, this guy’s a
full-blown white supremacist.” He’s not even mildly a white supremacist. He
thinks everyone other than the white race should be gone and people like
me shouldn’t be allowed on the streets. It was still fascinating, and he’s still
really smart. I kept reading it. I read it and read it and read it.
After a while, I built up my own sense of his coherent view of the world and
where he was coming from. To do that, I couldn’t have judged too much and
I’m certainly not going to go around bragging to my friend, “Hey, I learned
this from a white supremacist the other day.” To some level, you almost have
to read the stuff you’re reading because you’re into it and that’s it. You don’t
need any other reason. There’s no mission here to accomplish. Just read
because you enjoy it.
If you read what everybody else is reading, there’s wisdom that you’re going to
think what everybody else is thinking. You need the diversity. Almost like an
index fund approach, where you’re going to catch the winners. You can’t really
identify a lot of them beforehand that are going to change you as a person
because so much about it is contextual.
I think almost everything that people read these days is designed for
social approval. All of the best sellers are about social approval and social
conditioning. If you really wanted to be successful, happy, blah, blah, blah, all
those external metrics, you’re looking for a non-average outcome. You can’t
be reading the average things, to your point.
All these things are actually as old as the hills. You can go read Adam
Smith and The Wealth of Nations. You can go read Benjamin Franklin and
his aphorisms and understand how to live your life. You could read Charlie
Munger. You could read Charles Darwin and understand evolution from the
source. You could read Watson and Crick and understand the structure of the
double helix in DNA. Instead what we choose to read are whatever is number
one at the airport best seller or whatever our friends are reading.
I know people who have read 100 regurgitated books on evolution and they’ve
never read Darwin. Think of the number of macroeconomists that are out
there. I think that most of them have read tons of treatises in economics,
but haven’t read any Adam Smith. At some level, you’re doing it for social
approval. You’re doing it to fit in with the other monkeys. You’re fitting in to
get along with the herd. That’s not where the returns are in life. The returns
in life are being out of the herd.
Social approval is inside the herd. If you want social approval, definitely go
read what the herd is reading. It takes a level of contrarianism in saying,
“Nope. I’m just going to do my own thing, regardless of the social outcome to
learn anything, I think, that’s interesting.”
Do you think there’s some sort of loss aversion there? Because once you
diverge, you’re pushing out, say there’s a Gaussian distribution, you’re pushing
it to one of the tails If you feel that you’re going to lose out on that, you’d
rather just stay in the middle, if there’s a chance that you’re not going to be in
the fat tail for a positive?
Absolutely. I think that’s why the smartest and the most successful people I
know started out as losers. If you view yourself as a loser, as someone who
was cast out by society and has no role in normal society, then you will do
your own thing and you’re much more likely to find that winning path. It helps
to start out by saying, “I’m never going to be popular. I’m never going to be
accepted. I’m already a loser. I’m not going to get what all the other kids
have. I’ve just got to be happy being me.”
Yeah. I think that’s true. When you’re reading, do you just read and it sticks in
your head or is it more like you take notes? Do you have a system for how you
keep track of that or review them?
I’m both lazy and I’m really focused on being present. I think taking notes is
the same as taking photos when you’re on a trip. All it’s doing is taking you
out of the moment.
Who really sits there, years later, and goes back and looks at all their trip
photos and gets nostalgic? Go take your next trip. I just don’t believe in
anything from the past. Anything. No memories. No regrets. No people. No
trips. Nothing.
A lot of our unhappiness also comes from comparing things from the past to
the present.
First time you saw a sunset, it was amazing. It was jaw-dropping. You forgot
yourself. The second time you saw it, it was cool. The hundredth time you see
it, it’s nothing. The thousandth time you’re seeing it, and someone shows you
a sunset, you’re like, “Well, actually, I saw this one sunset in Mexico at this
time that was really cool.” You’re not even there.
I don’t believe in clinging too much to memories. That includes in reading. I
do highlight. I catch myself doing that. I do it more because it’s just kind of
a way of rereading and rereading that particular paragraph at that moment
in time. Once in a blue moon, for my especially favorite books, I’ll want to
reread the book, but I’ll be short on time, so I’ll just reread the highlighted
passages until something catches my eye and then I get sucked back into the
book. The reality is that I could stop highlighting tomorrow and it would make
no difference. Note taking is even, I think, harder than that, so I do not take
notes.
Everyone’s brain works differently. Some people love to take notes. Actually
my note taking is Twitter. What I do is I read and read and read. If I have some
fundamental “ah ha” insight or concept, then what I like about Twitter is it
forces me to distill that into a 140 characters. Then I try and put it out there
as an aphorism and then I get attacked by all kinds of random people who
point out all kinds of obvious exceptions and jump my throat. I’m like, “Why
did I do this again?” Then I go into hiding for a little while.
You have one of the most thoughtful Twitter feeds that I know of. I hope nobody
jumps down your throat too bad there.
Thank you.
When you first pick up a book, are you skimming for something interesting?
How do you go about reading it? Do you just flip to a random page and start
reading? What’s your process for that?
I’ll start at the beginning, but I’ll move fast. If it’s not interesting, I’ll just start
flipping ahead or I’ll just start skimming or speed reading. If it doesn’t grab
my attention within the first chapter in a meaningfully positive way, I’ll either
drop the book or I’ll skip ahead a few chapters.
I don’t believe in delayed gratification when there are an infinite number of
books out there to read. There are so many great books. There are so many of
them that are so well written that I just can’t spend my time on these.
One thing I will do though. If I find that early on in the book the author starts
making statements that I think are just factually untrue, and one should
always be open to new ideas, but if they’re starting to make contradictions
where the epistemological load of acknowledging that contradiction - sorry to
use that 50 cent- word - I would have to revisit my entire lifetime of learning
and undo it and start over.
Yes, gravity does not exist.
Exactly. I had a conversation recently with a guy who sounded really, really
smart and was throwing all kinds of science at me and my head was spinning.
Then he basically said, “As we know, thermodynamics isn’t really true.” That
was the point at which I was like, “Okay, I’ve got to destroy everything you just
said because thermodynamics is fundamental.”
That’s what the undo button is for.
Thermodynamics is not even a theory, it’s a law. It comes from the
mathematics. If you want to throw that out, then we have no basis for
conversation. If I find something like that in a book, where someone says, “Oh
yes, I cleared my mind and I watched my thought process and then I was able
to levitate”, then I have to put the book down because now I don’t know what
in here is true and what in here is false. Basically, what I’m looking for is is
the author knowingly lying or completely deluded. If they are, then I can’t fill
my brain with that junk because I can’t separate truth from fiction.
Generally, I’ll skim. I’ll fast forward. I’ll try and find a part that catches me.
Usually though what happens, in most books though, is most books have one
point to make. Obviously, this is nonfiction. I’m not talking about fiction. They
have one point to make, they make it, and then they give you example, after
example, after example, after example, and they apply it to explain everything
in the world. Once I feel like I’ve gotten the gist of it, I feel very comfortable
putting the book down. There’s a lot of these, what I would call pseudoscience
best sellers, that are all over that everyone’s always reading. People are like,
“Oh, did you read this book on duh, duh, duh?” I always says yes, but the
reality is I read maybe two chapters of it. But I got the gist.
I want to switch gears a little bit and talk about decision-making, which is kind
of what you get paid to do, both as an investor and the CEO of AngelList. You’re
kind of paid to be right when other people are wrong? Do you have a process
around how you make decisions?
Yes. Decision-making is everything. In fact, someone who makes decisions
right 80% of the time instead of 70% of the time will be valued and
compensated in the market hundreds of times more.
I think people have a hard time understanding that, but that’s a fundamental
fact of leverage. If I’m managing $1 billion and I’m right 10% more of the time
than somebody else, then that’s $100 million worth of value on a judgment
call. With modern technology and large workforces and capital, our decisions
are getting leveraged more and more.
If you can be more right, more rational, and that’s one of the reasons why I
love your blog because it really focuses on helping you be more right, better
decision-making, more rational, then you’re going to get nonlinear returns in
your life. Decision-making is everything.
Decision-making, what is going on, the brain is a memory prediction
machine. It has a memory of things that worked in the past and what it’s read
and it’s trying to predict the future.
A lousy way to do memory prediction is X happened in the past, therefore X
will happen in the future. It’s too based on specific circumstances. What you
want is you want principles. You want mental models.
The best mental models that I have found have come through evolution, game
theory, and Charlie Munger, who I’m sure you quote a lot on your blog. Charlie
Munger is Warren Buffett’s partner. Very good investor. He has tons and tons
of great mental models. Nassim Taleb has great mental models. Benjamin
Franklin had great mental models.
I basically load my head full of mental models. Different ones apply to every
situation, so I don’t really want to checklist. For example, I studied a lot of
complexity theory when I was younger. It’s a field that I got into. Occasionally,
I just get into these things and I just learn a lot about that field.
My most recent one is cryptography. I was really into complexity theory back
in the mid-90s. The more I got into it, the more I understand the limits of
our knowledge and the limits of our prediction capability. That’s been super
helpful to me. That has helped me come to the system that operates in the
face of ignorance. I believe that, fundamentally, we are ignorant and very, very
bad at predicting the future.
I don’t believe that I have the ability to say what is going to work. Rather,
what I try to do is I try to eliminate what’s not going to work. I think being
successful is just about not making mistakes. It’s not about having correct
judgment. It’s about avoiding the incorrect judgments.
I have mental models around how do I determine if I can trust somebody,
around what are the actual odds that this is going to work, how much margin
of safety do I have, if it works out? Angel bets and venture bets are great
because they have nonlinear outcomes in the positive, but on the downside
you can only use one X. On the upside, you can make 10,000 X. I’ve tried to rig
the game.
I don’t believe in specific goals. Scott Adams said, famously also, “Set
up systems, not goals.” Use your judgment to figure out what kinds of
environments you can thrive in and then build a system to create that
environment around you so that you’re statistically likely to succeed. I’m not
going to be the most successful person on the planet, nor do I want to be.
I just want to be the most successful version of me while working the least
hard possible. I want to be in 1000 universes, Naval is successful in 999 of
them. He’s not a billionaire, but he’s done pretty well in all of them.
Whatever the metric is, or he’s happily married in most of them. He may not
have nailed it in every regard, but he set up systems such that he’s failed in
very few places.
Basically, I try and set up good systems and then the individual decisions
don’t matter that matter much. I think our ability to make individual decisions
is actually not great. For example, as an investor, my system is I want to see
10,000 companies and I want to pick 500 that have a shot of being huge. Then
I want the option to double down on the five winners. I don’t want to just look
at 100 companies and pick 10 that I think are winners and go all in on those. I
don’t think I have that capability.
I think there’s ex-post facto reasoning and origin stories that people make up
about why they were successful. The real separation here is you look at which
people are consistently successful, especially in Silicon Valley, there are lots
of one-hit wonders, but how many people consistently seem to do something
interesting, build something interesting, make money, and do something new.
I’m not in this to make money. Money is just a piece of paper. Every time I
see one of these billionaire founders giving away to a hospital or whatever,
you know they overshot. They don’t need that much money. There’s huge
diminishing returns to money after a certain point, especially now that I’m
more into freedom from rather than freedom to.
There’s nothing I want to do that I can’t do. Literally, money in that sense is
a boat anchor around my neck. All it is something that I’m then fearful of
losing, something I’m getting into jealousy debates about, something that
people want from me.
I’m not even in it anymore for the money. It’s like, “Can I do something
interesting and new? Can I create something brand new that the world has
never seen that it gets value out of, that it uses, that is congruent with my
morals, so I never have problems sleeping at night. I never have to worry
about selling something that I wouldn’t buy.” I’m much more into that.
I don’t have a checklist system for decision-making. I know that’s a big thing
recently. Atul Gawande wrote The Checklist Manifesto and I think that’s good
for pilots and surgeons. I don’t think it’s necessarily great for investors or
entrepreneurs.
Oh yeah. I think he totally misses the point with decision-making.
I agree. By the way, that’s another one of those books where you just read
the first chapter and you’re done. It would have been a great blog post. I also
don’t think you need to be that hard on yourself.
A lot of what goes on today is a lot of your listeners are right now, beating
themselves up and scribbling notes and saying, “I need to do this and I need
to do that and I need to do ...” No, you don’t need to do anything. All you
should do is what you want to do. If you stop trying to figure out how to do
things the way other people want you to do them, then you get to listen to that
little voice inside of your head that wants to do things a certain way and then
you get to be you.
No one in the world is going to beat you at being you. You’re never going to
be as good at being me as I am. I’m never going to be as good at being you
as you are. Certainly listen, absorb, but don’t try and emulate. It’s a fool’s
errand. Instead, each person is uniquely qualified at something. They have
some specific knowledge, capability, and desire that nobody else in the
world does. That’s just purely from the combinatorics of human DNA and
development.
Your goal in life is to find out the people who need you the most, to find out
the business that needs you the most, to find the project and the art that
needs you the most. There is something out there just for you. What you don’t
want to do is be building checklists and decision frameworks built on what
other people are doing. You’re never going to be that. You’ll never be good at
being somebody else.
You’re inevitably going to miss stuff, too, in checklists. You mentioned kind
of how you determined if you can trust somebody and I know you’ve said
in the past you kind of Buffet’s criteria for evaluating people, which is the
combination of intelligence, energy, and integrity. What predictive signals do
you pay attention to for each? How do you determine if you can trust someone?
A large part of your job is that, right?
That’s the hardest one. Integrity is the hardest one. Integrity usually comes
out in two ways. One is long-term, which is you’ve known somebody for a
while and you kind of know how they think about things.
The more interesting one, there’s a short-term one, which is you just kind of
see how they treat other people. There are lots and lots of people who will
not screw over, screw over is a strong word, but they will do something that
is self-dealing or slightly unethical relative to another business partner. The
whole time they’ll say to you, nudge nudge, wink, wink, “I’m taking advantage
of that person because they deserve it. You’re my friend and I would never do
that to you.”
Of course they would.
Exactly. It’s very easy to change your definition of who friends are. I find that
the people who really do things out of integrity, they have an internal moral
compass. They don’t do unfair, unethical, or bad deals with other people
because it would soil their own view of themselves and they wouldn’t be able
to sleep themselves at night. Some of the highest integrity people I know, the
worst thing you can do is you can say to them is, “I think you’re self-dealing
on that one.” They will get so unhappy because they’ll be like, “No, no, no.
That’s not who I am. I can’t be that person.” They’ll bend over backwards.
Usually, I find that people that I negotiate with who are high integrity, they’re
very easy to negotiate with. They’ll give you things that they don’t need to give
you because they think it’s fair and vice versa.
Negotiations with high-integrity people are usually very easy. You’re giving
each other things to make sure the other person is happy enough that the
deal survives. Unhappy deals get unwound and they become short-term
relationships, which don’t have any compounding benefits. Finally, if someone
is going around and talking about how honest they are, they’re probably
dishonest. That’s just a little telltale indicator I’ve learned. When someone
spends too much time talking about their own values or they’re talking
themselves up, they’re covering for something.
There’s actually a good book. It’s kind of out of print. I think it’s hard to track
down. You maybe you can find online somewhere. It’s not the obvious one.
The name of the book is called The Art of Manipulation.
I found it because of a tweet that I followed from @illacertus and it was really
good. This guy basically goes undercover and lives with con men. He spends
time with them running cons and learning all about cons. Without judgment,
he just lays down how con men work. He put down there how to spot them
when they’re being dishonest. Some of the telltale signs are they will push
the deal a little bit too hard. They’ll sell just a little bit too hard. They’ll talk
about how honest they are.
I have great people in my life who are extremely successful, very desirable,
like everybody wants to be their friend, very smart. Yet, I’ve seen them do one
or two things that are slightly not great to other people. The first time I’ll tell
them. I’ll go up and I’ll say, “Hey, I don’t think you should do that to that other
person. Not because you won’t get away with it. You will get away with it, but
because it will hurt you in the end.”
Not in some cosmic, karma kind of way, but I believe that deep down we all
know who we are. You cannot hide anything from yourself. Your own failures
are written within your psyche and they are obvious to you. If you have too
many of these moral shortcomings, you will not respect yourself. The worst
outcome in this world is not having self-esteem. If you don’t love yourself,
who will?
I think you just have to be very careful about doing things that you are
fundamentally not going to be proud of because they will damage you. The
first time around, I will warn them. By the way, nobody changes. Then I just
kind of distance myself from them. I sort of cut them out of my life. I just have
this saying inside my head, the closer you want to get to me, the better your
values have to be.
I like that a lot.
When I met my wife, it was a great test because I really wanted to be with her
and she wasn’t so sure at the beginning. In the end, we ended up together
because she saw my values. I am lucky I had developed them by that point.
If I hadn’t, I wouldn’t have gotten her. Not that I own her or anything, there’s
no attachment like that. I wouldn’t have deserved her. It’s like, as Charlie
Munger says, “To find a worthy mate, be worthy of a worthy mate.”
I think working with your values is long-term selfish, although short-term
it absolutely involves sacrifices. If being ethical were profitable, everybody
would do it. We wouldn’t have to have a separate consent. We wouldn’t need
to talk about it. There would be no books on it. No one would ever talk about
values because they’d be profitable. It’s not. It’s obviously unprofitable. It
involves sacrifices. Like everything in life, if you are willing to make the shortterm sacrifice, you’ll have the long-term benefit.
My physical trainer, Jerzy Gergorek, really wise, brilliant guy. He always says,
“Easy choices, hard life. Hard choices, easy life.” Basically if you are making
the hard choices right now in what to eat, you’re not eating all the junk food
you want and making the hard choice to workout, then your life long-term
will be easy. You won’t be sick. You won’t be unhealthy. The same is true of
values. The same is true of saving up for a rainy day. The same is true of how
your approach your relationships. If you make the easy choices right now,
your overall life will be a lot harder.
I like that. I want to dive into intelligence a little bit there, too. How do you
separate the people who know what they’re talking about from these people
who pretend they know what they’re doing? I mean, we’re full of a world where
it’s so easy to pretend you have knowledge that you don’t actually have.
Real knowledge is intrinsic and it’s built from the ground up. Going back
to my math example earlier, you can’t understand trigonometry without
understanding arithmetic or geometry.
Basically, if someone is using a lot of fancy words and a lot of big concepts,
they probably don’t know what they’re talking about. I think the smartest
people can explain things to a child. If you can’t explain it to a child, then you
don’t know it.
I think that’s very true and it’s a common saying. Richard Feynman, very
famously if you go into his lectures, Six Easy Pieces, one of his early physics
lectures, he has one where he basically explains mathematics in three pages.
He starts from number line, counting, and then he goes all the way up to precalculus. He just builds it up through an unbroken chain of logic. He doesn’t
rely on any definitions.
For example, if somebody says, “Oh, that bird is called this or the rule for
this thing is that.” They’re not going to be telling you anything fundamental,
they’re telling you about humans. They’re telling you about naming systems.
True understanding is about algorithms. It’s about understanding how things
connect to each other.
I think it’s the mark of a charlatan to try and explain simple things in
complicated ways. It’s the mark of a genius to explain complicated things in
simple ways. Really they should be able to do it very, very, very simply.
I have to catch myself on this because I have a big vocabulary because I read
a lot. I can sound smarter than I am just by using big words.
In the process, I’m being dishonest with myself. It’s okay to use more precise
words. English is a big language with a lot of words and so that allows for a
lot of precision. If you’re deliberately using words that your audience doesn’t
know or if you even think that you’re using a word that your audience doesn’t
know and you don’t catch yourself and correct that, then you are essentially
being dishonest. You’re just trying to show off. You’re trying to pull one over
their eyes.
There’s a great book by Randall Munroe who is the creator of xkcd, that
very science-oriented comic, and it’s called Up Goer Five. It’s a reference
to the Saturn Five rocket that took the Apollo missions into space. What
he is doing in that book is he explains all these very complicated concepts
all the way from climate change to physical systems to submarines and so
on, but he does it only using the 1000 most common words in the English
language. That’s why he called it the Saturn Five rocket Up Goer Five. It’s
called a rocket. You can’t define a rocket as a spaceship or a rocket. It’s selfreferential. He says up goer. It’s this thing that goes up. Kids get that right
away.
That’s the Thing Explainer, the book, I think.
I’m sorry. You’re right. The name of the book is Thing Explainer. Up Goer
Five is one of the pages. There’s another great book that’s called Thinking
Physics. I open this one all the time and I love on the back cover it has this
great little pitch. It says, “The only book that’s used in both grade school
and graduate school.” It’s true. It’s all simple, physics puzzles that can
be explained to a 12-year-old child, that they can puzzle over, and can be
explained to a 25-year-old grad student in physics. They all kind of have
fundamental insights in Physics. They’re all kind of tricky, but anyone can get
to the answer through purely logical reasoning.
I love reading the history of how scientists came up with their various
breakthroughs. For example, relativity. Relativity is a fascinating thing. It’s a
very advanced concept, but in way it’s very simple because Einstein came up
with it with what are called Gedanken, fancy word for thought experiments.
It means thought experiments in German. He was able to basically just do
logical thought experiments in his mind until he came up with relativity and
then he formalized it with mathematics and with predictions that he made
that were later unfalsified, that were basically shown to be true. A really
brilliant physicist like that, they get there by pure reasoning and pure logical
reasoning. It’s not like he had to go draw out the complicated diagrams and
so on. He just understood things at a very basic, fundamental level.
Again, this goes back to, I think, the really smart thinkers are clear thinkers
and they understand the basics at a very, very fundamental level. I would
rather understand the basics really well than have memorized all kinds of
complicated concepts that I can’t stitch together and I can’t rederive them
from the basics. If you can’t rederive them from the basics as you need it,
you’re lost. You’re just memorizing.
It seems like a large part of making effective decisions kind of boils down to
dealing with reality. How do you make sure you’re dealing with reality when
you’re making decisions?
By not having a strong sense of self or judgments or mind presence. The
monkey mind will always respond with this regurgitated emotional response
to what it thinks the world should be. That will cloud your reality. This
happens a lot of times when people are mixing politics and business.
For example, in January this year, I wrote a little piece on the election.
I kind of predicted that Trump or Bernie was going to win. One of those
two characters was going to win. That’s not what I wanted to have happen
necessarily. I’m an elite. My life is pretty good. I’m not looking for rabble
rousers to change everything, but I wanted to see a reality the way it was as
opposed to the way I wanted it to be.
I think the number one thing that clouds us from being able to see reality is
that we have preconceived notions of the way it should be.
There’s one definition of a moment of suffering is that it’s that moment
when you see things exactly the way they are. This whole time you’ve been
convinced your business is doing great and really you’ve ignored the signs
that it’s not doing that well. Then your business fails and you suffer. That’s
just because you’ve been putting off reality. You’ve been hiding it from
yourself.
The good news is that when you’re suffering, when you’re in pain, that’s a
moment of truth. That is a moment where you’re forced to embrace reality
actually the way it is. Then you can make meaningful change and progress.
You can only do that when you’re starting with the truth.
I think the hard thing here is seeing the truth. To see the truth, you have to
get your ego out of the way because your ego doesn’t want to face the truth.
The smaller you can make your ego, the less conditioned you can make your
reactions, the less desires you can have about the outcome you want, the
easier it to see the reality.
The clear example of this is when we’re going through difficult things, like
a breakup or a job loss or business failure or a health problem and our
friends are advising us. When we’re advising them, the answer is so obvious.
It comes to us in a minute and we tell them exactly, “Oh that girl, get over
her, she wasn’t good for you anyway. You’ll be happier. Trust me. You’ll find
someone.”
You know what the correct answer is, but that person can’t see it because
they’re in that moment of suffering and pain. They’re still wishing that reality
was different. The problem isn’t reality. The problem is their desire colliding
with reality is preventing them from seeing the truth, no matter how much
you say it. The same thing happens when I’m making decisions.
The more of a desire that I have that it work out a certain way, the less likely I
am to see the truth. Especially in business, if something isn’t going well, I try
to acknowledge that publicly and I try to acknowledge it publicly in front of my
co-founders and friends and co-workers. That way then I’m not hiding it from
anybody else. If I’m not hiding it from anybody, then I’m not going to basically
delude myself from what’s actually going on.
You once said anything you can think has been thought of and tried. The only
way you’re going to find something is if you stick to it at an irrational level and
try a whole bunch of things. This kind of makes an idea a commodity, but the
judgment and execution incredibly rare. How do you evaluate if someone is
picking the right idea and if they have the capacity to execute on that idea?
The best founders I’ve found are the ones who are very long-term thinkers.
Even decisions that maybe they shouldn’t care that much about early on,
they fix it because they are not building a house, they’re putting bricks in the
foundation of the skyscraper, at least in their minds.
What you’re looking for is looking for someone who knows the space well,
who understands how difficult it’s going to be, but doesn’t care because they
just love whatever they’re doing, they’re into it, and they commit to it for the
long haul. Passion and vision alone are not enough. I think Steve Case said
that vision without execution is a hallucination. Execution alone isn’t enough.
Then, unfortunately, at least in the technology business, there’s a lot of luck
required. Right place, right time, market forces, timing, regulatory action
against or pro. There’s a lot of things that control where the platforms are
shifting, what open source efforts show up. You can never predict the outside
successes. What you can predict is the failures.
You can say, “This person doesn’t know this field at all. They’re way out of
their depth. This person, they’re a short-term thinker. They’re not going to
last the game. They’re not going to go as far as needed.”
As I was saying, there are no new ideas. All the ideas have been thought of.
It’s about the combination of the idea plus the execution plus the passion.
Like Steve Jobs was a visionary and a great designer, not because he came up
with the idea to build the smartphone.
Many people had tried to build a smartphone. It’s because he had a very high
bar for the design. He understood the manufacturing tolerances and what
the technology was capable of and what it wasn’t. He could rally the people
and the resources to get it done. He actually didn’t care about the financial
outcome. He took a dollar instead of a salary from Apple. He just wanted to
see it done. He was willing to do it for as long as it takes until it worked.
It’s kind of this magic ... of factors. Then the timing in the world happened
to be right and the technology was around and Jony Ive was there and who
knows how many other factors intersected to make it happen.
Just as many factors that intersected on his side, there were ones that
intersected against him. For example, he had to take over Apple, which was a
horribly failing company at the time. The poor guy died of pancreatic cancer.
He got taken out early. Think about what more he could have created, what
more he could have done for the world. He probably wasn’t happy in the
whole process. He drove himself to ruin. I think you do have to be irrationally
optimistic to succeed and passionate. You also have to really know your stuff.
I meet a lot of entrepreneurs who are either short-term thinkers, in which
case, that’s okay. It just means this is not the thing for you. Go find the thing
you can commit to for 10 years because that’s how long it’s going to take,
minimum, to get a good outcome. You have to enjoy the journey because
there’s no guarantee on the outcome.
You have to be really, really good at it, which means that you probably love it
so much that you’re willing to put in the time before there’s even any return
on it. I think the best founders, they have a deep understanding of the space
they’re going into, enough to be contrarian. They have a deep passion for it,
so that they’ll just keep working on it. They have execution skills. They just
get things done. They solve problems. They’re capable.
I love that. I don’t get to invest with Angel founders, but we all deal with people
with similar, in business or life, if we’re establishing a partnership, whether
it’s with a customer, a supplier, a relationship, we have similar concerns about
their short-term thinking and will they take advantage of us and how should
we go about entering that relationship and is this relationship fragile. I think
that’s a good way to think of it.
One thing I figured out kind of late is that generally, at least in the tech
business in Silicon Valley, great people have great outcomes. You just have
to be patient. Every person that I met at the beginning of my career 20 years
ago, where I looked at them and said, “Wow, that guy or that gal is super
capable. They’re so smart and dedicated and blah, blah, blah. Now we’ll just
be friends or hang out or whatever”, and then I kind of forgot about them, all
of them, almost without exception, became extremely successful. You just
had to give them a long enough timescale. It never happens in the timescale
you want or they want, but it does happen.
I want to circle back and ask you a few more questions about life before we
wrap up. You’ve kind of called your philosophy rational Buddhism. How does
that differ from traditional Buddhism? What type of exploration did you go
through to arrive at that?
The rational part means that I have to reconcile with science and evolution.
I have to reject all the pieces that I can’t verify for myself. For example, is
meditation good for you? Yes. Is clearing your mind a good thing? Yes. Is there
a base layer of awareness below your monkey mind? Yes. All of these things
I’ve verified for myself.
Some of the beliefs that come out of Buddhism I believe and follow because,
again, I’ve verified or reasoned with thought experiments there myself.
What I will not accept is things that are written down as just so, like, “There’s
a past life that you’re paying off the karma for.” I haven’t seen it. I don’t
remember any past lives. I don’t have any memory. I just have to not believe
that.
When people say your third chakra is opening and your second chakra. I don’t
know, that’s just fancy nomenclature. I have not been able to verify or confirm
any of that on my own. If I can’t verify it on my own or if I cannot get there
through science, then it may be true, it may be false, but it’s not falsifiable so
I cannot view it as a fundamental truth.
On the other side, I do know that evolution is true. I do know that we are
evolved as survival and replication machines. I do know that we have an ego
so that we get up off the ground and worms don’t eat us and we actually take
action. What rational Buddhism, to me, means understanding the internal
work that Buddhism espouses to make yourself happier and better off and
more present and more in control of your emotions and being a better human
being.
I don’t subscribe to anything fanciful just because it was written down in
a book. I don’t think I can levitate. I don’t think that meditation is going to
give me superpowers and those kinds of things. It’s basically try everything,
test it for yourself, be skeptical, keep what’s useful and discard what’s not. I
would say my philosophy falls down to, on one pole, is evolution as a binding
principle, because it explains so much about humans and, on the other side,
is Buddhism, which is the oldest, most time tested spiritual philosophy on the
internal state of being inside each of us.
I think those are absolutely reconcilable. I actually want to write a blog post at
some point about how you can map the tenants of Buddhism, especially the
non-fanciful ones, directly into a virtual reality simulation.
What I mean by that is if you believe we’re living in a VR sim, which I know
some people are espousing, or if you believe the Buddhist view of the world,
with samsara and nirvana and all that, you would actually come to the same
conclusions on how to live your life.
What are the areas of your life right now that you’d like to change the most and
why?
I would like to be less time bound. I’d like to be less greedy about signing up
for things. I don’t know how to describe this. You know what it really is — I
had a tweet recently where I was going back and forth with somebody and
then came up with this concept of there should be a two-factor authentication
on your calendar.
Yeah.
This two-factor authentication when you’re logging into a website that, if your
password gets stolen, the thief or hacker doesn’t have your phone, so they
can’t login because the phone has to generate a unique code. I wish there
was a two-factor code against my calendar because current me, present me,
is always making promises for future me. Current me is tired, exhausted,
hungry, wants to go home, wants to go to sleep, wants to read a book, wants
to hang out with the wife and baby. Future me is this dynamic, high-energy
individual who will always show up to every meeting and will have a lot of
energy and will want to get a lot of things done.
I commit myself to all these commitments in the future that when the future
me arrives, it’s actually this present me that’s back to being lazy and hungry
and tired. I want a two-factor against myself. The way I would like to do that
is I think every time I make a commitment to anything, I should instead just
write it down and then just check back in 48-hours later and then with a clear
mind say do I commit to doing this? Even better would be saying, “If I commit
to doing something, then I commit to doing it right now.” If I’m not willing to
do it right now, then don’t do it. Don’t commit to it.
That’s the Derek Sivers approach. If you’re not saying, “Hell yes” right now,
then you should just be saying no, I think.
Yeah. I think this is something of every busy person. I just want to be much
better at managing my own time because you go through life through an
exploration phase and then you switch to an exploitation phase. I’m very
much in the exploitation phase. I’m not looking for more exploration. All
that said, I have a hard time saying no. If I had one wish, the most important
thing to me would be I would constantly be running my mind in debug mode.
I would literally be watching every single thought I have and letting no
reaction pass without it being stopped, inspected, strip searched, examined,
understood, and then let go. The reality is that takes a lot of time and we’re
highly conditioned creatures. I do view a lot of my goals over the next few
years of unconditioning previous learned responses or habituated responses,
so that I can make decisions more cleanly in the moment without relying on
memory or prepackaged heuristics and judgments.
What’s the most common mistake you see people make over and over?
It’s a tough question because it’s so contextual. It really depends on the
context. I think the most common mistake if I look at how they’re on planet
earth, for humanity, is the idea or the belief that you’re going to be made
happy because of some external circumstance.
I know that’s not original. That’s not new. That’s fundamental Buddhist
wisdom, so I’m not taking credit for it. I think I really just recognize it on the
fundamental level, including in myself.
We just bought a new car. We have a baby. We needed a safer car. We were
driving a little mini cooper before. Not enough room in there.
We bought a new car. Now I’m waiting for the new car to arrive. Of course,
every night, I’m on the forums reading about the car. Why am I doing that?
It’s a silly object. It’s a silly car. It’s not going to change my life that much or
at all. I know that the instant the car arrives I won’t care about it anymore.
What it is is, I’m addicted to the desiring. I’m addicted to the idea that this
external thing is going to bring me some kind of happiness and joy and this is
completely delusional.
I think just looking outside for anything is the fundamental delusion. Not to
say you shouldn’t say do things on the outside. You absolutely should. You’re
a living creature. There are things that you do. You locally reverse entropy.
That’s why you’re here.
You’re meant to do something. You’re not just meant to lie there in the sand
and meditate all day long. You should self-actualize. You should do what you
are meant to do.
The idea that you’re going to change something in the outside world and that
is going to bring you the peace and everlasting joy and the happiness that you
deserve, that is a fundamental delusion that we all suffer from, including me.
The mistake over and over and over is to say, “Oh, I’ll be happy when I get that
thing, whatever that is.” That’s the fundamental mistake that we all make,
including me, 24/7, all day long.
I definitely see myself in that answer.
Because you’re human. All of us do it.
I want to end with a really unbounded, big question, which is: What is the
meaning and purpose of life?
That’s a big question. Because it’s a big question, I’ll give you three answers.
One is it’s personal. You have to find your meaning. Any piece of wisdom that
anybody else gives you, whether it’s Buddha or you or me, is going to sound
like nonsense. I think fundamentally you just have to find it for yourself, so
the important part is not the answer, it’s the question. You just have to sit
there and dig with the question. It might take you years or decades. When you
find an answer you’re happy with, that will be fundamental to your life.
The second answer I would give is there is no meaning to life. There is no
purpose to life. Osho said, “It’s like writing on water or building houses on
sand.” The reality is you’ve been dead for the history of the universe, it’s 10
billion years or more. You will be dead for the next 70 billion years or so until
the heat death of universe.
Anything you do will fade. It will disappear, just like the human race will
disappear and the planet will disappear. Get to Mars, even that group will
disappear. No one is going to remember you past a certain number of
generations, whether you’re an artist or a poet or a conqueror or a pauper or
nothing. There’s no meaning.
You have to create your own meaning, which is what it boils down to. You have
to decide. Is this a play that I’m going to that I’m just watching? Is there a
self-actualization dance that I’m doing? Is there a specific thing that I desire
just for the heck of it? These are all meanings you are making up.
There is no fundamental intrinsic purposeful meaning to the universe. If
there was, then you would just ask the next question. You’d say, “Why is
that the meaning?” It would just be, as Richard Feynman said, it would be
turtles all the way down. The whys would just keep accumulating. There is no
answer you could give to that question that wouldn’t have another why.
I don’t buy the everlasting afterlife answers because it’s insane to me, with
absolutely no evidence, to believe that because of how you live 70 years here
on this planet, that you’re going to spend an eternity, which a very long time,
in some afterlife. What kind of silly God judges you for eternity based on some
small period of time here? I think that after this life, it’s very much like before
you were born. Remember that? It’s going to be just like that.
Before you were born, you didn’t care about anything or anyone, including
your loved ones, including yourself, including humans, including whether we
go to Mars or whether we stay on planet Earth, whether there’s an AI or not.
You just don’t care.
I met this entrepreneur who was obsessed with Steve Jobs and he was
making all of these sacrifices trying to be like the next Steve Jobs. I said to
him, “Do you want to be exactly like Steve Jobs right now?” He said, “Yes.”
I said, “Steve Jobs is dead. He doesn’t care about anything. He’s gone. Like
zero. He’s not registering at all. If you want to be like Steve Jobs, you don’t
want to be Steve Jobs, just be you, right now. He would trade places with you
right now in an instant if he could.” I don’t think there’s any real meaning or
purpose to life.
The last answer I’ll give you is a little more complicated than that. From what
I’ve been reading in science, friends of mine have written books on this, and
I’ve kind of stitched together some theories. Maybe there is a meaning to life,
but it’s not a very satisfying purpose.
Basically, in physics, the arrow of time comes from entropy. Second law of
thermodynamics says that entropy only goes up, which means disorder in
the universe only goes up, which means concentrated free energy only goes
down. If you look at what living things are, living systems, humans, plants,
civilizations, what have you, these are systems that are locally reversing
entropy. Humans locally reverse entropy because we have action.
In the process, we globally accelerate entropy until the heat death of the
universe. You could come up with some fanciful theory, which I like, that
we’re headed towards the heat death of the universe, where there’s no
concentrated energy, where everything is sort of at the same energy level.
Therefore, we’re all one thing. We’re essentially indistinguishable. 
What we are doing, as living systems, is we’re accelerating getting to that
state. The more complex of a system you create, whether it’s through
computers and civilization or through art or mathematics or just through
creating a family, you’re actually accelerating the heat death of the universe.
You’re pushing us to towards this point where we end up as one thing. I think
that’s kind of an unsatisfying answer if you’re looking for personal meaning
today in your life.
That was phenomenal. Listen, Naval, thank you so much. This was just
absolutely mind blowing. I really appreciate it. Where can people find you?
Twitter @Naval or on my blog at startupboy.com.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. It’s been great.